“When I got out of CalArts, in 1997, I thought nothing was going to happen,” Bradford said. He went back to working full time at the salon; he could pay off his art-school loans that way, and, besides, he’d always loved the place. “I was shy, but at the hair salon I could talk, make people laugh,” he told me. “My mom would look over and say, ‘Do you really need to be saying that? T.M.I., Mark—too much information!’ ” He rented a studio in Inglewood, a working-class area adjoining South Central, and he would go there after work. He was still looking for a way into art. At the salon one day, he noticed an end paper lying on the floor—one of the rectangular, tissue-thin strips of paper that hairdressers use to wrap curls in a permanent wave. Something about the way this one reflected the light made him think about using end papers in a painting. The next evening, he took several boxes of them to his studio and started experimenting. They were translucent, almost invisible, but he found that if he burned the edges with a match (later, he used a blowtorch) the burnt line established a grid pattern. He applied a thin wash of hair dye over the surface, and started another layer. “End papers were fifty cents for a box of two hundred,” he said. “I couldn’t afford to pay twenty dollars for a tube of acrylic paint, but I could go to Home Depot and get paint they’d mixed wrong for a dollar a can. I liked the end papers. I liked the social fabric they represented, and so I built this vocabulary, using only paper.” This was when Bradford began to realize that the way he made art and the way he styled women’s hair were related. The trick was to keep things moving—reach in, try something, and, if that didn’t work, fix it and try something else, and then bring everything together at the end.


Juice, 2003. Mixed media on canvas. 72 × 84 inches. Private Collection. © Mark Bradford. Photo: Charles White

On a clear day, I can usually see all the way to Watts, 2001. Mixed media on canvas. 72 × 84 inches. The Bluff Collection. © Mark Bradford

Mark Bradford, The Some of Its Parts, 2004, billboard paper, photomechanical reproductions, acrylic gel medium, curlpapers, acrylic paint, additional mixed media on canvas, 60 x 70″